There are some rolls here, by the way. Oh, no,
thanks. There's a go. And when I did, I never
cooked, so I wasn't using the kitchen in my
apartment. So I just made the kitchen into an
office. But it's adequate for me, but it isn't much
of a place to entertain anybody. Yeah, I
understand that. That's why I suggested coming
down here. This is fine. It's not any problem,
really.
Now, after the plant closes down, then what do you
do? Where do you go from there? You stay with Bureau
of Mines? Well, I was already here. At the time, I
was in charge of engineering here. So I was just on a
leave of absence to the State Department for this
Pakistan plant, mainly because it was a coal
plant.
required oxygen and required low-temperature
liquefaction, both of which, again, are
compression processes. So I came back here. Some
of the people from out there stayed on. Most of them
got out of their jobs. They were pretty much in
demand, really. And it was back in the days when
government salaries weren't too good. Well, see,
Cattell left for a couple years, and then he came
back. His job was primarily on costing. He set up a
cost group here. And he retired about a little over
a year ago.
So of the group out there, there's, I
don't know of any, but everybody's gone.
A couple of them came back and worked at the
anthracite station, but they're gone. Kenny and
Bircher. But they're both retired.
Mr. Wainwright? Wainwright was never out there. I
see. He was here. I see. He just retired this year.
He had a gas purification program here. In fact,
the gas purification that we used on the
Fisher-Tropsch plant out there was pretty much
what they had developed here, and it worked okay.
I was the resident engineer on the Fisher-Tropsch
plant. It was a copper project, and it was designed
in Pittsburgh. Copper didn't move engineering in
like Bexhill did. They wanted somebody to go out.
So again, being single, I spent a better part of a
year out here. And then toward the end, we were
starting up the plant. So then Cattell come out and
finished up the job. But my job was primarily
buying equipment for the Fisher-Groves plant.
And since it was all of the compressors and a lot of
the pumps were on steam, So that was one reason they
wanted me to come back here on account of my
esteemed background.
Why the cost studies on the plan, I wonder? Why? Why
the cost studies on the plan? Well, the idea of
making the—all of our work, we always tried to
extrapolate to see whether—I mean, the only way
that you can direct research is to look out ahead
and see where you're going. And I mean, if you've
got something that works the best thing in the
world and you find out that, one, you can't scale it
up, or two, if you do scale it up, it's going to be so
expensive nobody will ever want it, you better get
into some other type of research. And that's, in
effect, what happened. Well, yeah, it was pretty
obvious. Well, two things happened. One, there
were two different plants. it was pretty obvious
that the coal hydro plant, the pressure was just
plain too high. And on the Fisher Toast plant, that
was already being picked up. Keith built a plant,
which never operated for very long, down in
Brownsville, Texas, Fisher Toast plant. And then
the next step was that they built these big ones in
South Africa. So actually, all of the gasoline and
oil that's been built by— made from coal
synthetically has all been made after the war was
all by Fischer-Tropsch. Which never worked well
for the Germans. Well, see, there was a reason for
it, and that was that the Germans, this was back in
the propeller plane days, and the thing that the
Germans wanted was very high octane. And the coal
hydro made it. So see, all their aviation gasoline
was made of coal hydro. And the Fisher-Tropes in
those days, and still does as far as that goes,
makes a wide spectrum. With the coal hydro, you can
pretty much tailor it. But with the
Fisher-Tropes, you make a wide spectrum. And they
made everything. They made alcohol, and they made
butter, and they made gasoline.
But most of their synthetics were made from coal
hydro rather than FT. The big advantage of FT was,
of course, the pressure. You can go out and buy the
equipment off the shelf. Did you ever run into
problems with IG Farben, conflict of patents or
conflicts of... If they did, I know nothing about
it. As far as I know now, I think we just adopted the
attitude that we wanted to order.
That's my impression. Of course, I was over there
afterward. In fact, I even spent some time with IG
Farben. One of the things I was interested in on
this Pakistan job was utilizing the Winkler
gasifiers rather than the Lergy's, since the
Lergy's made a lot of methane. I didn't
particularly want the methane, but I found out
that the—everything was pretty much cut and
dried, so we ended up with Lergy's. But I did spend
some time at the—well, this was—actually, I said
IG Farben. Actually, it wasn't. It was the BASF at
Ludwigshaben. And I knew Dr. Flesch in those days,
and he'd very much like to put in some But
unfortunately, we ended up—that was the only
Mooney plant I know that ever used Lurgies. Did you
use any other variations, like Schmalfeld?
Schmalfeld was never very practical. In fact, we
did some work here with an offshoot of it, in which
we—of course, the idea of the Schmalfeld was that
you recycled hot gases.
We always found that no matter what we did, we still
had to use oxygen, so we cut it out. And, of course,
it didn't come on in a new dress under Penn Income,
but it was new. The gasification processes that
were really practical in Germany were the clergy
for town gas in the winter for synthetic fuels.
Copper's toxic came along. In fact, we had copper.
In fact, we had toxic out at Louisiana and
Missouri. We had a copper's toxic gas fire out
there, but the thing never worked because he
insisted on bringing the the coal in with the
oxygen, and it was always blowing up and catching
on fire. So we finally got rid of it. But since that
time, it's become a viable process. And I guess
most of the ammonia around the world that's made
from coal has been made with copper's toxic. And I
understand that the ERDA is just going to contract
to, I guess, the coppers for a copper's toxic for a
hydrogen plant. Where do you pull such vast
amounts of hydrogen from? Where? Where do you pull
that from? You always get it from water. I see.
That's the name of it. You know, washer stuff. Yes,
that's right. Always comes from water. What you
do, you trade carbon for hydrogen if you're going
all the way with coal.
In fact, hydrogen gave Germany, without their
hydrogen technology, Germany couldn't have
fought either world war.
So you end up with what, CO, just CO gas? Well, you
make CO and hydrogen and then use the water gas
shift to shift the CO to hydrogen and CO2 and wash
out the CO2.
Any more questions?
Did you inquire what's I wanted to continue that.
Now, after, let's say now, we're talking about
1952, right? Is that about when you leave the
plant? We shut down the plant in 1952. I left in 1952
to go overseas. The plant was shut down July 1,
1953, and I'm still over there. I came back in
September of that year. And then what do you do?
Then you come back to work here? I came back to work
here and finished up the plant here. Okay. And then
we moved out there in 1954. Yeah. So I was still
working on the engineering and construction of
this plant when I came back. And then you consult
for private industry then? Then? No, I couldn't. I
worked for the Bureau. So you don't begin to
consult for Diamond Shamrock then until after? I
never consulted for Diamond Shamrock. I just
happened to be interested in their Oh, OK. And the
fact that they've got a plant here. And I've always
been interested in these metallurgical
processes. And the thing I found out was that they
were having, I understand, having some trouble
getting natural gas. And I thought that there was
some talk, and again, this is forehand, that they
might move the whole operation over here at
Kingwood. And I was interested in that, if indeed I
could help. That's the two-stage hydrogenation.
I'm not really too sure about it, exactly how they
do it. I think the hydrogenation work was done over
in Maryland, and then the product was shipped
here, and I think it was an electric furnace the
rest of the way, but I'm not 100 percent sure. The
only thing I'm interested in, what was
interesting, was making hydrogen from coal
natural gas. I worked for the guy that developed
the natural gas reforming, Shapley.
But now it's—we've got to go the other way. See,
that's one of the things. All these plants that
have been built, nobody has ever faced up to making
the hydrogen. Louisiana, Missouri, we got it from
our—we call them cracking furnaces. They call
them reformers now. And then all these other
plants have been built. solvent-refined coal,
and high gas, and all of them, they've always
gotten the hydrogen from reforming natural gas,
because it's an easy way to do it. So nobody's
really faced up to it. Is this the high gas process
that started IGT? Yeah, that's right. They've
gotten away from the hydrogenation now. It's
pretty much an oxygen process, pretty much like
xanthine, really.
For
whom do you consult? For whom do you consult? Just
anybody. Primarily mechanical technology. And
then I also consult for two groups for Gilbert. And
then I consult for Rocketdyne
and Argonne Lab. But, you know, it's one of these
things. I just work when they want me to. I work, I
guess, about seventy days a year. And then put
another thirty. Another thirty, huh? That's a
nice job. And then another thirty. Well, see, I had
thirty-three years in the government at a fairly
high grade. It actually wouldn't pay me to work for
the government anymore. I could make about as much
as I retired as I could work. That's many years. I
just do this as a hobby, really. I could probably
I've never looked for somebody who wants me fined.
In fact, amazingly, last year, an awful lot of my
work has been MHD.